# Workshop: Intro to SQL for Querying Databases

_[UC Davis DataLab](https://datalab.ucdavis.edu/)_  
_Spring 2022_  
_Instructor: Nicholas Alonzo <<nicholas@diversifyds.org>>_  
_Authors_: [Nicholas Alonzo](https://github.com/nicholas-alonzo) & [Michele Tobias](https://github.com/MicheleTobias)  
_Editor:_ [Nick Ulle](https://github.com/nick-ulle)  

* [Reader](https://ucdavisdatalab.github.io/workshop_intro_to_sql/)
* [Event Page](https://datalab.ucdavis.edu/eventscalendar/introduction-to-sql-for-querying-databases/)
* [Event Recording](https://video.ucdavis.edu/media/t/1_ymmhls5c)

This workshop teaches the basics of SQL using SQLite and SQLiteStudio. This
workshop provides an overview of the utility and base SQL commands for working
with data in a relational database. We’ll focus on querying data to get to know
a database and answer questions, and joining data from separate tables.

## Goals

After this workshop learners should be able to:

* Describe the advantages and disadvantages of using SQL for data problems.
* Use SQL queries to view, filter, aggregate, and combine data.
* Combine SQL keywords to develop sophisticated queries.
* Use SQL queries to solve problems with and answer questions about data.
* Identify additional resources for learning more about SQL (such as how to use
  SQL with the R programming language).


## Prerequisites

No prior programming experience is necessary. Before the workshop, learners
should:

* Install [SQLiteStudio][sqlitestudio] and verify that it runs. See the
  [install guide][install] for details.
* Download the file `2022-04-04_intro-sql.zip` from [this link][materials].
  Unzip the file and keep track of where it's saved on your computer. It
  contains a data set and a script that will be used during the workshop:
    + `lcdb.db`
    + `intro_to_sql_spring22.sql`

[sqlite]: https://sqlite.org/
[sqlitestudio]: https://sqlitestudio.pl/
[install]: https://ucdavisdatalab.github.io/install_guides/sql-and-database-tools.html#sqlitestudio
[materials]: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Ans5_GIMgDlpLrNjPK0J9BhbqDTi4zUe/view?usp=sharing


## Contributing

The course reader is a live webpage, hosted through GitHub, where you can enter
curriculum content and post it to a public-facing site for learners.

To make alterations to the reader:

1.  Run `git pull`, or if it's your first time contributing, see
    [Setup](#setup).

2.  Edit an existing chapter file or create a new one. Chapter files are R
    Markdown files (`.Rmd`) at the top level of the repo. Enter your text,
    code, and other information directly into the file. Make sure your file:

    - Follows the naming scheme `##_topic-of-chapter.Rmd` (the only exception
      is `index.Rmd`, which contains the reader's front page).
    - Begins with a first-level header (like `# This`). This will be the title
      of your chapter. Subsequent section headers should be second-level
      headers (like `## This`) or below.
    - Uses caching for resource-intensive code (see [Caching](#caching)).

    Put any supporting resources in `data/` or `img/`. For large files, see
    [Large Files](#large-files). You do not need to
    add resources generated by your R code (such as plots). The knit step saves
    these in `docs/` automatically.

3.  Run `knit.R` to regenerate the HTML files in the `docs/`. You can do this
    in the shell with `./knit.R` or in R with `source("knit.R")`.

4.  Run `renv::snapshot()` in an R session at the top level of the repo to
    automatically add any packages your code uses to the project package
    library.

5.  When you're finished, `git add`:
    - Any files you added or edited directly, including in `data/` and `img/`
    - `docs/` (all of it)
    - `_bookdown_files/` (contains the **knitr** cache)
    * `renv.lock` (contains the **renv** package list)
<!--
    - `.gitattributes` (contains the Git LFS file list)
-->

    Then `git commit` and `git push`. The live web page will update
    automatically after 1-10 minutes.


### Caching

If one of your code chunks takes a lot of time or memory to run, consider
caching the result, so the chunk won't run every time someone knits the
reader. To cache a code chunk, add `cache=TRUE` in the chunk header. It's
best practice to label cached chunks, like so:

````
```{r YOUR_CHUNK_NAME, cache=TRUE}
# Your code...
```
````

Cached files are stored in the `_bookdown_files/` directory. If you ever want
to clear the cache, you can delete this directory (or its subdirectories).
The cache will be rebuilt the next time you knit the reader.

Beware that caching doesn't work with some packages, especially packages that
use external libraries. Because of this, it's best to leave caching off for
code chunks that are not resource-intensive.


[Back to Top](#top)
